Once you have a few basic games of Ultimate Werewolf under your belt, there are all sorts of variations that can be played. Typically this involves adding new roles to the game to make things more interesting, but it also can mean tweaking various rules. There's no right or wrong way to play!

Discuss with all of the players which roles they would like in the game, and which set of rules. The Moderator should have the final say while still trying his best to accommodate all players. Use the chart in the Scenarios section to determine the proper mix of Werewolves, Villagers and special roles, or create a new custom mix.

Once you get to about 25-30 players in your group, consider splitting the group into multiple games; the games will go faster and players will have more chances to take on special roles. If you decide to split your group into multiple games, you'll need at least one Moderator for each game, and the games should be far enough apart that they aren't disturbing each other.

When certain roles are in the game, the end of the game isn't as clear as "when the Werewolves are eliminated, the village team wins," and "if the number of Villagers equals or is fewer than the number of Werewolves, the werewolf team wins." That's because other roles can have different winning conditions, and also because some characters can upset the balance of the endgame. For instance, if the Witch is in the game and she still has at least one of her powers left, she has the ability to win the game for the village team (or lose it) even if there are the same number of village team and werewolf team players still in the game. The Moderator needs to be aware of these situations, and plan for them accordingly. When you have a 3rd party in the mix, like the Tanner, the game could end early because he reached his winning condition before the village or werewolf team.

The following rules variations can be mixed and matched as you see fit; this allows your Ultimate Werewolf game to be fully customized.

While the basic Ultimate Werewolf game has you reveal the specific role of each player after they are eliminated (by showing the eliminated player's card to all players), you might choose to handle this aspect differently. The following variants employ more limited role reveals.

This variant results in the Moderator revealing only if the player was a Werewolf or not. Specific roles are never revealed. Sometimes it's obvious what those roles are. As the Moderator, you'll need to call roles of eliminated players each night as necessary... for instance, if the Seer is eliminated on the 2nd night, you'll need to call her every night after the 2nd night, and pretend to have her indicate a player to you. Sometimes the players will figure out who is eliminated; sometimes they won't. Only if it's plainly obvious to the players should the Moderator skip an eliminated role that is called every night. The team of the deceased is revealed (Werewolf, Villager, Vampire, Cult, etc.).

Following an elimination, nothing is revealed about the player except that they're eliminated. This provides the least information to the Village team, and makes the game easier for the werewolf team. Many experienced players love playing this variation, as it opens up many more possibilities for deception and trickery on the part of the werewolf team (for instance, a Werewolf can claim to be the Seer, and the real Seer can't disprove it...instead you can have two or more players claiming to be the Seer at one time, with the players uncertain who really is the Seer, even after those players' eliminations). With no reveal, you can have many more special roles in Ultimate Werewolf, as the players will not be able to easily claim roles because no one will know for sure when they are eliminated.

Some of the roles, such as the Lone Wolf and Village Idiot, benefit greatly if they "might" be in the game. In order to pull this off, the players should be experienced and familiar with all of the potential roles. This also allows for there to be more roles in the game than otherwise. In addition, it can be fun to make the actual number of Werewolves uncertain as well. Uncertainty helps the werewolf team more than the Village team. In order to set up a game with variable numbers of Werewolves or variable roles, mix the roles/Werewolves you want to be variable with a number of Villagers (the more Villagers, the better for the werewolf team), and randomly discard a number of cards equal to how many Villagers you added. As the Moderator, you may then look at the cards before you mix them with the rest of the roles so you have some idea of what you're in for. Remember to never mix the Seer or all the Werewolves in with the other roles...you always want at least one Seer and one Werewolf in a game!

Changing how votes are cast and how players are accused can make the game more interesting, and also serve to speed it up or slow it down. The following variants change the standard accusation/vote process:

The first two players accused and seconded are voted on. The Moderator designates the first player as thumbs up, and the second as thumbs down. The players vote, and the player with the most votes is eliminated. In the case of a tie, both players are eliminated. This variant ensures at least one elimination per day, and can make the game move along quickly.

One player declares that another player is safe, and is definitely not a Werewolf. At that point, all the players (including the one who made the declaration that another player was safe) raise their hands, except for the safe player. Then the safe player declares another safe player, who puts his hand down, and so on until only one player has his hand up. That player is eliminated. Discussion throughout the process is encouraged, though the 2nd-to-last safe player is the one who is making the decision each time. This process can take a long time.

Each of the players writes down the name of another player. The Moderator reads the ballots out loud, and the player who receives the most votes is eliminated. If two or more players are tied for the most votes, there is a re-vote, but players may only write down the names of the players who were tied. If another tie occurs, all tied players are eliminated.

The Moderator tells everyone there will be a vote, then says "1, 2, 3, vote!" All players must point at another player. The player with the most fingers pointing at them is eliminated. In case of a tie, there's a re-vote, where players may only point at the tied players. This method can take a lot of time for the Moderator to count votes, but that time can be used by the players to see who is pointing at whom, giving them additional fodder for the next day's conversation.

To keep the game fresh, you can invoke various changes each day. When the game slows down, or just to keep things interesting, pick one of the following daily variants for the next day. Use the following chart if you'd like a dynamic, ever-changing Ultimate Werewolf game. At night, roll two six-sided dice and use the variant shown below for the next day. The variant should be announced immediately to the players.

If you roll a 2, the next night, the target of the Werewolves becomes a new Werewolf. If you roll a 3, the first player accused and seconded is instantly eliminated, with no vote. If you roll a 4, there are two eliminations instead of one. If you roll a 5, indicate the player last chosen by the Seer. If you roll 6 through 8, there is no variant. If you roll a 9, it is the same as the previous day. If you roll a 10, the Process of Elimination is used. If you roll an 11, there is no discussion except for accusations. If you roll a 12, the next night, the target of the Werewolves loses his special ability instead of dying.

It can be fun to have certain roles change hands during the game. The actual roles to be exchanged needs to be clear prior to the game starting, and carefully chosen so as not to break the game, and done secretly during the night. As a rule, the players should not know the previous owners of the roles they are given. Role swapping needs to be done in a very limited fashion, or it is very easy to have multiple players declare their previous roles and be safe from eliminations. Moving a player to Werewolf status is much easier than the other way around; a player who was a Werewolf knows the identities of the Werewolves and would have to be placed on the werewolf team (Sorceress, Minion, etc.).

When playing multiple simultaneous games, there are opportunities that add interesting options to the games, most of them involving players moving from one game to another. This can result in Werewolves changing villages, having two Seers in one village (they get the same single vision each night), and all sorts of other interesting predicaments. As the Moderator, you'll need to check the card of the player who is entering your game so that you're aware of these situations. Each village votes on a player to ban each day prior to elimination. The banned player goes to another village immediately (or the next "day" if it is nighttime). Any role may move from one village to another, and that role should not be revealed to the players.

A single Moderator can moderate multiple games at one time, provided that the nights don't take place at the same time. The best way to do this is to tell the village that they can't vote until you're "back" to their village. After each unsuccessful vote, go to the next village, which may then vote. If they aren't ready to vote, go to the next one, etc. If they vote to eliminate, walk them through that night, and then move to the next village after that. If you'll be using this variant, be sure to write down the roles, as it gets very confusing very fast otherwise.

As the Moderator, you have an enormous amount of control over how the game plays out. The most important thing to keep in mind while playing is that you want everyone to have fun. If one of the variants below is something that would be a lot of fun for your group on a rare occasion, go for it.

As the title states, this is a game without Werewolves or the Seer. But the players don't know that. Instead, you as the Moderator call the Werewolves and Seer each night, and choose a victim to be eliminated that evening. The result is a game that will be talked about for a long time in the future...however, prepare for pretty much everyone in the game to be really irritated with you. On the positive side, it adds another layer to future games when you're moderating and no Werewolves have been found after a few days.

This makes for a really short game (and can only be done with as many players as there are Werewolf cards), but it's a lot of fun to do once. Give every player a Werewolf card, send them all to sleep, and wake the Werewolves. There's nothing like the awkward silence of seeing every other player opening his or her eyes at once. Of course, the game is over instantly, and the Werewolves win!

As the Moderator, you'll be responsible for setting up the room, choosing the right set of roles for your group, explaining the game and answering questions, and leading them through the game. Ideally you should try to participate as a player in a game of Ultimate Werewolf before you moderate, but it isn't required. As the Moderator, your role is critical, but you are the least important "player" in the game. It's your job to make each of the other players feel that they are critical to the outcome of the game. You should be invisible during the day, only helping to facilitate voting and to resolve issues.

Each Moderator has his or her own style of moderating; some add significantly to the ambiance of the game, some keep their involvement to as little as possible and let the players create the story. There's no right or wrong way to moderate, and the players will undoubtedly push you in one direction or another as the game progresses. Having a richly-themed game occasionally can be exceptionally fun, such as the following scenario: Rick Thornquist's English Pub. In this scenario which takes place at the infamous Slaughtered Lamb pub, all players are required to speak with a proper English accent. Roles include the local Drunk and the pub Ghost (who has been "hanging" around the pub for years). In order to get everyone in the spirit of the game, hand out a sheet with some English sayings on it that they can use during the game, such as "I'll put the kettle on," "Bob's your uncle," "Poppycock!" and "I'm knackered, old chap!" Just a little bit of effort such as this sets the mood and can make for a memorable Ultimate Werewolf game!

Try to keep the room where Ultimate Werewolf is played as quiet as possible, and limit the number of Ultimate Werewolf games to one per room (unless the room is large enough to support two games where one game won't disturb the other). Arrange the chairs in a circle, giving each player a few inches of space on either side of him or her. Some Moderators prefer to play with a table (or tables) in the center of the chairs, as it allows for an easy place to put name card tents and a place for players to put their cards. Some Moderators like the intimacy created by empty space between the players, which also allows them to walk into the middle of the circle. If possible, allow for enough space between the chairs and the walls so that the Moderator can walk behind the players, and so that the players who are eliminated can leave the circle but still watch the game. If you're playing with people who don't know each other, provide a name card tent (a small folded piece of paper) and marker to each of the players. Name badges/stickers for the players work great as well.

The Moderator score pad helps you to keep track of roles and other special circumstances depending on the roles and variants that you're playing with. When you are setting up the game, list the special roles on the left column. Circle the dot to the left of each of the roles that has to be called each night. Enter the roles in the order that they should be called (e.g. Werewolves before Witch). On the first night, write the name of the player with that role to the right of the role. If you aren't using name card tents or badges and don't know the players' names by heart, use descriptors like "Hawaiian shirt" to help you remember the person in each role. Use the other columns to track victims (this is especially useful in games with lots of roles called out each night so you don't forget who was targeted), cult members, and other special events as necessary.

Some special roles require tapping the shoulder of a player to alert them to a new role, a new power, or something else. As a rule, tell the player that if they are tapped on the shoulder they should open their eyes. Tap the players on the shoulder during the appropriate "call" for things like passing the Amulet of Protection, letting the Apprentice Seer know that the Seer is eliminated and that she is the new Seer, telling someone that they are the new Cult Leader, etc.

Different roles have differing amounts of impact on each team, indicated on the lower right corner of each card. The higher the positive number, the more in favor the game will be for the Villagers. The greater the negative value, the more in favor the game will be for the Werewolves. The numbers are guidelines, but keeping the sum close to zero will result in the most balanced game possible. If your group contains a lot of people who don't know each other, the werewolf team will have an advantage. Add about +5 points worth of special roles in order to balance the game. If your group contains mostly experienced players who have played Ultimate Werewolf together, the Werewolves need a boost. Add in -5 to an experienced group when balancing the game.

Once everyone has been seated, the person who is moderating should start explaining the game of Ultimate Werewolf. Cover the following topics: 1) A village with Werewolves in it, 2) Winning conditions for each team, 3) The basic day/night flow, 4) The rules about nighttime, 5) The rules about elimination, 6) The roles in this particular game, 7) Eliminated players must be quiet/leave. After this explanation, it's time to take questions from the players (you don't want them asking questions about gameplay during the game, as it might look to the other players as if they have a special role).

If this is the first game of Ultimate Werewolf for many of the players, it will take a little longer than subsequent games. At the same time, part of your role as Moderator is to keep the game moving, and if conversation starts to falter, to encourage accusations. However, be careful not to add any editorial opinions or information that can be interpreted by the players to provide the identities of any roles. Keeping the number of nighttime wake-up roles limited will help keep the game moving fast (and be easier to manage for the Moderator).

Some groups will procrastinate in their accusations or just not talk that much on the first day when there is very little information to go off of. As the Moderator, encourage the village to accuse a player for elimination because "it's getting late." After a few warnings, put the village to sleep without an elimination. A good Moderator can get the game moving at a brisk pace by providing a single warning each day, and then just putting the village to sleep a few minutes later if they still haven't voted on enough players or had an elimination take place. If you'd like, put a timer in place with a 5-10 minute time limit for each day's discussion. If the timer is viewable by all the players (an iPad or laptop screen is very effective), they'll keep things moving at a brisk pace, and the players will encourage each other to move things along. While it's good to keep the game moving, part of the fun of Ultimate Werewolf is the discussion process. If the group is actively involved in a heated debate, you probably want to let the discussion continue for a little while, even if the day is longer than usual.

Each night as you call out the roles, be sure to walk around the players, changing directions often, being sure not to speak directly to anyone. Take different amounts of time between your requests, so the players can't deduce anything from how long it took to do any action. When calling out roles at nighttime, try to refrain from gender-based pronouns like he and she, and his and hers. It's a natural part of speaking to do this, but this can give information to the group that would be unfair if you happen to be accurate. This tends to be more of a problem later in the game, often when a single Werewolf remains, so be extra aware of avoiding pronoun usage then.

Always use a timer when playing Ultimate Werewolf. You can use anything from a wall clock to a timer app to the free Ultimate Werewolf Timer App (available on both iOS and Android, search for it on their respective app stores). Timers not only make games flow faster, but they add a sense of urgency to player deliberations. Games with timers are simply better than those without timers. With that said, timers do have another impact on gameplay: they hurt the village team. Werewolves are much more likely to avoid being eliminated during the day. Compensate the use of the timer by boosting some of the village team roles so that the total of your cards (from the numbers in the lower right) is greater than zero. The Moderator should decide how long to make each day. Players will always want longer days, but resist the urge to set the time of each day too long, or you're not much better off than when not using a timer.

To properly use any timer, set the time for each day, which starts after the Moderator reveals who was eliminated the previous night. When time runs out, the day is over, and if no one was eliminated, that's too bad for the village, as night comes and the werewolves get to target someone for elimination. The first day should always be the longest day, with each subsequent day getting shorter. Use the guideline of 30 seconds per player in the game. As the village gets smaller, days get shorter and shorter. Because there's a lot of tension towards the end of the game, it can be a good idea to extend the last day (or if the game will be over if the players eliminate the wrong/right player) by a few minutes. However, even a three person village shouldn't require more than a few minutes of discussion between players; this last round can go on ridiculously long as the players discuss their options ad-nauseam. Be sure that all players can see the timer as it counts down, so everyone is aware of how much time they have left.

When time is up for the day, it's the Moderator's decision on how to proceed: 1) The day ends and everyone falls asleep instantly. 2) Any accusation that is being defended and discussed is voted on immediately, and regardless of the outcome, the village falls asleep instantly. 3) The players have a few seconds to accuse a player and he has a very abbreviated time (less than a minute) to defend himself from the vote. The Moderator should be consistent when time is up, so the players know what to expect.

Since it's free, there's really no reason not to use the handy Ultimate Werewolf Timer App. The app has a help section that explains how to use the app; be sure to read this to get the most out of using it. If you use the app with a tablet, the time will be easier to see by all players than if you use it with a phone. But using it with a phone is better than not using it at all!

You may make a mistake when moderating. Because of the hidden nature of roles, it might be difficult for the players to tell you (for instance, if you accidentally eliminate a different target than the Werewolves indicate). In most cases, if you can correct the mistake by stating that you made a mistake and undoing something, without having a negative impact on the game, that's the best thing to do. If it's too late, and the mistake has had an impact on gameplay in favor of one team or another, try to balance the mistake if possible. If you forget to call a role or do something else at night, put the players back to sleep immediately and correct the mistake.

Ultimate Werewolf is a great team building exercise when played properly. It's a great way to get to know people on a team that doesn't normally have a great amount of interaction, and a fun way for a team to build relationships on a personal level. Ultimate Werewolf provides several stimulating problem-solving tasks that help group members develop their capacity to work effectively together, including decision-making, logic, and especially the ability to convey their opinions and build trust within their group. Ultimate Werewolf can be played in meetings, following presentations, as part of larger workshops, and as a refreshing break from back-to-back seminars, education programs, or corporate training. Ultimate Werewolf games may be adapted for virtually any setting, young or old players, large or small groups, and across cultures. Much depends on the role played by the Moderator (who is typically the facilitator of the overall team-building program). In the hands of an excellent Moderator, even the most basic game of Ultimate Werewolf can become a significant experience for participants.

An important part of team building exercises is the participants' reflection and discussion about the activity, how they approached the situation, and possible points of learning. The post-game discussion is the area that the Moderator/facilitator should focus on. Immediately following a game of Ultimate Werewolf, have a focused group conversation about the game, how things played out, and why different players chose different actions throughout the game. First, separate the players into their respective teams, then have each of the participants briefly talk about their experience in the role that they had. Don't let the special roles overshadow the plain Villagers: being a Villager and keeping under the radar or being falsely accused can be just as intriguing as one of the more visible roles. Second, ask the teams what they would have done differently in hindsight. What mistakes did they make? Were there lapses in logic? Third, direct the players to discuss who among them was the best leader during the game. Who did they trust the most, and was there a real or just perceived reason to trust them? Who seemed suspicious? Who played the game "under the radar" and survived to the end as a result?

Everyone likes to win, but sweetening the pot with a token prize (gift cards, t-shirts, etc.) tends to enhance the intensity and level of participation for most players. This should be added at the discretion of the Moderator.

Ultimate Werewolf involves misdirection, bluffing, and lying directly to other people. While this is done in the context of a game, it needs to be made very clear to all players that playing this game successfully requires those tactics. What happens in Ultimate Werewolf should stay in Ultimate Werewolf; depending on the maturity level of the group, this may need to be emphasized. Because players who are eliminated early are still watching the game, there's often an urge to comment or make obvious motions/noises when something happens that the deceased finds particularly frustrating or bad for his team. Before the game, and after the first few players are eliminated, remind them to be quiet and not communicate anything to the players in the game, because that really does wreck the game for everyone. Encourage eliminated players to stick around to watch the game play out. It's fascinating for those players to see who are in each of the roles, and then to watch the game unfold with that knowledge.

Use the Scenarios chart below to quickly determine which mix of roles to use for your game. If you or the group is new to Ultimate Werewolf, it can be a good idea to use fewer than the suggested number of special roles. If you think you'll have enough time for more than one game, you might try one basic game (as described in the Basic Game section) with just Villagers, Werewolves and the Seer, and then add in additional roles in subsequent games. While the following games have player counts next to them, you can easily play the scenario with a different number of players by adding or removing roles. Use the values on the lower right of the role cards to keep the balance correct (the roles you remove should equal a sum of zero if possible). All player counts do not include the Moderator.

Village of Visions (5 players): This tiny village has a single Werewolf who is also a Sorceress. In this game, the Seer should not get a vision on the first night, but the Werewolf/Sorceress should. The roles are 3 Villagers, 1 Seer, 1 Werewolf/Sorceress.

Village of Doom (9 players): The Villagers only have a few days to seek out and eliminate both Werewolves, but the Old Hag must expel a player from the village discussions each day. The roles are 5 Villagers, 1 Seer, 1 Old Hag, 2 Werewolves.

Village of Uncertainty (10 players): A single Werewolf is joined by a Sorceress and an unwilling Lycan (to help confuse the Seer) to battle the Village team. The roles are 5 Villagers, 1 Seer, 1 Lycan, 1 Hunter, 1 Werewolf, 1 Sorceress.

Village of Atonement (11 players): This small village has two Werewolves, but one of them is the selfish Lone Wolf. The roles are 6 Villagers, 1 Seer, 1 Witch, 1 Werewolf, 1 Lone Wolf, 1 Sorceress.

Tiny Village/Big Secrets (15 players): Secrets abound in this village, with Masons, a Cursed, Cupid's soulmates, the Spellcaster keeping things quiet, and the Cult Leader working in the background each night. The roles are 4 Villagers, 1 Seer, 1 Aura Seer, 2 Masons, 1 Cupid, 1 Spellcaster, 1 Lycan, 2 Werewolves, 1 Cursed, 1 Cult Leader.

Classic Werewolf Village (16 players): This is exactly the game you want after completing your first basic game; it uses a few new roles that work exceptionally well together. This can be run at the same time as the Tiny Village of Big Secrets scenario. The roles are 8 Villagers, 1 Seer, 1 Witch, 1 Hunter, 1 Mayor, 3 Werewolves, 1 Sorceress.

Village of Voices (20 players): At the 20 player mark, adding the Ghost and the Troublemaker adds an additional layer to the game and can speed it up as well. The roles are 6 Villagers, 1 Seer, 1 Witch, 1 Hunter, 1 Mayor, 2 Masons, 1 Ghost, 1 Troublemaker, 4 Werewolves, 1 Wolf Cub, 1 Sorceress, 1 Drunk.

Party Village (21 players): All sorts of crazy goings on are happening here, with several teams vying for the win. The roles are 6 Villagers, 1 Seer, 1 Troublemaker, 1 Mayor, 1 Aura Seer, 1 Bodyguard, 1 Old Hag, 4 Werewolves, 1 Minion, 1 Sorceress, 1 Cult Leader, 1 Tanner.

Village of Pain (22 players): The Village has very little going for it, with 5 Werewolves and a Lycan. The roles are 8 Villagers, 1 Seer, 1 Witch, 1 Hunter, 1 Cupid, 2 Masons, 1 Priest, 1 Tough Guy, 1 Lycan, 4 Werewolves, 1 Wolf Cub.

Village of Peace (22 players): The Apprentice Seer is the acting Seer with no first night vision. The roles are 8 Villagers, 1 Apprentice Seer, 1 Witch, 1 Spellcaster, 1 Pacifist, 1 P.I., 1 Ghost, 1 Diseased, 1 Prince, 4 Werewolves, 1 Cursed, 1 Drunk.

Village with No Seer (22 players): The Seer has vanished, so the village has to take on the Werewolves without her help. Fortunately, there are a lot of characters with special roles willing to help out. The roles are 5 Villagers, 1 Aura Seer, 1 Witch, 1 Hunter, 1 P.I., 1 Bodyguard, 1 Cupid, 1 Ghost, 1 Spellcaster, 1 Mayor, 1 Old Hag, 1 Pacifist, 1 Idiot, 4 Werewolves, 1 Cursed.

Village of the Vampires (27 players): Vampires have taken over the Village and a Werewolf is making an elimination every night. The Minion is on the vampire team, and the Sorceress is on the werewolf team. The Hunter is a Vampire Hunter; if he is eliminated by Vampires, he automatically eliminates the Vampire sitting closest to him. The roles are 7 Villagers, 1 Seer, 1 Witch, 1 Bodyguard, 1 Vampire Hunter, 2 Masons, 1 Ghost, 1 Tough Guy, 1 Mayor, 1 Prince, 1 Idiot, 1 Drunk, 1 P.I., 4 Vampires, 1 Minion, 1 Werewolf, 1 Sorceress.

Village, Incorporated (33 players): This is a typical village setup that's a great starter village for a large group using the base rules. The roles are 11 Villagers, 1 Seer, 1 Mayor, 1 Prince, 1 Ghost, 1 Apprentice Seer, 1 Witch, 1 Diseased, 1 Tough Guy, 1 Hunter, 1 Cupid, 1 Old Hag, 1 Old Man, 1 Cult Leader, 1 Tanner, 6 Werewolves, 1 Cursed, 1 Sorceress.

Big Village/Tiny Secrets (35 players): For this scenario, you should not reveal roles when characters are eliminated. The small Vampire team has their work cut out for them. The roles are 10 Villagers, 1 Seer, 1 Lycan, 1 Witch, 3 Masons, 1 Aura Seer, 1 P.I., 1 Spellcaster, 1 Priest, 1 Bodyguard, 1 Idiot, 1 Pacifist, 1 Troublemaker, 6 Werewolves, 1 Minion, 1 Lone Wolf, 3 Vampires.

Tourist Trap Village (38 players): This scenario has three teams (Vampires, Werewolves and Villagers), and plays fast thanks to a limited number of "call every night" roles. The roles are 15 Villagers, 1 Seer, 1 Hunter, 1 Tough Guy, 3 Masons, 1 Idiot, 1 Prince, 1 Lycan, 1 Apprentice Seer, 1 Mayor, 5 Vampires, 6 Werewolves, 1 Cursed (Vampire or Werewolf).

Village of Unspeakable Actions (50 players): This is a very large village with just two teams. It's the classic good vs. evil on a grand scale. The roles are 15 Villagers, 1 Seer, 1 Hunter, 1 Tough Guy, 3 Masons, 1 Ghost, 1 Old Hag, 1 Mayor, 1 Pacifist, 1 Village Idiot, 1 Aura Seer, 1 Prince, 1 Lycan, 1 Apprentice Seer, 1 Witch, 1 Ghost, 1 Spellcaster, 1 Cupid, 1 Bodyguard, 1 Idiot, 1 P.I., 1 Diseased, 1 Cult Leader, 1 Tanner, 7 Werewolves, 1 Cursed, 1 Sorceress, 1 Minion.

The Ultimate Village (75 players): This is the biggest game you can play with Ultimate Werewolf. It's crazy huge, and has two full teams of Werewolves and Vampires, as well as three Seers (regular, Aura and Apprentice). Use all the cards (except the blank ones) and have at it!

While the scenarios listed above are tuned to provide unique, specific experiences, you can always alter or add roles as necessary. Part of the fun of Ultimate Werewolf is setting up different games with different roles and seeing how the games play out. Unless the game is severely imbalanced (try to avoid this by keeping the sum of the village impact number in the lower right close to zero), you'll probably still have a great game on your hands. Sometimes an odd set of roles can make for a game that's much more compelling than you'd expect. Use the following guidelines in conjunction with keeping the village impact sum close to zero:

Always include plain "vanilla" Villagers. Villagers with no powers might be less interesting to play to some, but they keep the village going and provide a baseline for all the other special powers in the game. If you're using the basic game's "full role reveal," where all players know the role of each player when they are eliminated, you have to have more plain Villagers than normal, or a game will quickly devolve into each of the Village team's players stating their roles, leaving the werewolf team quickly exposed. You can get away with fewer plain Villagers if you don't tell the players what roles are in the game, but then you'll either need to provide the rules to the players or ensure that everyone knows what each role does. Another reason to include plenty of plain Villagers is that it provides a nice break from some of the more stressful roles in the game, and makes getting special roles occasionally that much more exciting.

The more people know each other, the more you need to help the werewolf team. A group of total strangers playing a balanced game of Ultimate Werewolf usually favors the werewolf team, and the opposite is true as well. The more the same group plays Ultimate Werewolf together, the more you'll need to boost the werewolf team (or reduce the Village team) to keep things fair.

Adapt to fluctuating player counts. Players tend to drift in and out of Ultimate Werewolf games right before they start. When you're setting up a game, and it seems likely but not guaranteed that there will be a few more players joining, put a few low-impact roles (Villagers, etc.) off to the side that you can add in without severely impacting the balance of the game. Once three or four more additional players have joined, re-review the scenario and determine if the original mix of roles still makes sense (often you'll be able to add one or two additional special roles).

The more players, the more special roles. In low player count games, each special role has a greater impact on the balance of the game than in high player count games. The ratio of special roles (including Werewolves) to Villagers in low player count games (fewer than 15 players) should be closer to 1:1. As you increase player count, increase the special role ratio up to and above 3:1.

This section lists the role cards included with Ultimate Werewolf. Each of the cards shows the Village Impact on the lower right; when you put several roles together in a game, you should be aiming for the sum of all the numbers on all the cards to be as close to zero as possible. Negative numbers make it more difficult for the Village team, while positive numbers help the Village team. On the right side is the name of the role. The colored bar at the bottom of the card lets you know which team that role is on: the Village team is blue, and the werewolf team is red. A brief description of the role is included on each card which allows players to understand their role simply from their card. However, there are many nuances to the roles which are discussed in the detailed descriptions below.

Seer (+7): Each night choose a player to learn if he is a Villager or a Werewolf. The Seer points at a player, and the Moderator shows her the "V" sign for Villager and the "W" sign for Werewolf. To be extra clear that the Seer knows that a targeted player is a Werewolf, the Moderator may use another indicator (such as bringing up both hands as claws and making a growling face).

Apprentice Seer: The Apprentice Seer becomes the Seer if the Seer is eliminated. The Apprentice Seer is woken up when the Seer is called after the Moderator has indicated to the Apprentice Seer that the Seer is eliminated (by a tap on the shoulder during the calling of the Seer at night if roles are not revealed). Alternate: In addition to taking over for the Seer when she is eliminated, the Apprentice Seer targets a player every night, but only learns if they are a Werewolf or not after choosing them twice. This requires additional bookkeeping by the Moderator, but gives the Apprentice Seer a way to contribute without the Seer having to be eliminated first.

Aura Seer: The Aura Seer looks for players with special roles that are not plain Villagers or Werewolves. The more special roles in the game, the more powerful this role becomes. Be sure to have at least one "evil" special role (like the Sorceress), so the Aura Seer isn't just functioning as a village team-finder. Alternate: The Aura Seer can be used to learn if the player is on the villager team. This should only be used if there are a large number of non-Villager roles (at least 3 in addition to the regular Werewolves). The Cursed, Doppelgänger, and Drunk appear to be on their current team.

Bodyguard: The Bodyguard chooses a different player each night to protect (but not the same player twice in a row). That player cannot be eliminated that night. He may not choose himself. Alternate: The Bodyguard may not protect the same player twice in the same game. 2nd Alternate: The Bodyguard's protected target can't be eliminated the next day.

Cult Leader: The Cult Leader picks a player each night to add to the cult (players picked do not know they are in the cult). The Cult Leader only wins if all players left in the game (not necessarily including himself) are part of the cult. Normal victory conditions for the other teams are still present. The Moderator will need to keep a running list of cult members. Alternate: If the Cult Leader is eliminated, the first cult member he picked becomes the new Cult Leader (the Moderator will tap this player on the shoulder when calling for the Cult Leader). The new Cult Leader continues to add members to the cult at night, in addition to any other role they might have. The new Cult Leader joins any previous Cult Leaders on the Cult team, and will only win if the only players left in the game at the end of the game are in the cult.

Cupid: Cupid wakes the first night and points at two players (one of which can be herself). The Moderator wakes them up the first night by tapping them on the shoulder so they can see who the other Sweetheart is. If one of them is eliminated, the other is eliminated (because of a broken heart) instantly. If both Sweethearts are on the villager team, they win with the villager team. If they are both on the werewolf team, they win with the werewolf team. If they are on different teams, they become their own team and only win if they are the last two players in the game. Being a Sweetheart overrides other winning conditions, such as those of the Lone Wolf, Tanner and Hoodlum. The Soulmates may have any other role in addition to being a Soulmate. Alternate: Include Cupid as an extra card when dealing out roles. After Cupid selects his targets, she receives the leftover card, and becomes that role for the rest of the game. 2nd Alternate: The Moderator randomly (or intentionally) chooses the Sweethearts, so no one knows who the Sweethearts are except themselves.

Cursed: The Cursed is on the Village team, unless he is targeted by the Werewolves, and then they join the werewolf team instead of being eliminated. Each night, the Moderator should wake the Cursed to let them know if they have switched teams (and once they have switched teams, he should continue to wake them so the players do not know he has been changed).

Diseased: If the Werewolves target and eliminate the Diseased player, they skip targeting the following night because they get sick. If the game does not have role reveal, the Werewolves still pick a target the following night, but that target is not eliminated. If the game has role reveal, the Werewolves do not pick a target.

Doppelgänger: The Doppelgänger selects a player the first night. If that player is eliminated, the Doppelgänger secretly takes over that role. Until her target is eliminated, the Doppelgänger is on the Villager Team. The Moderator should clearly indicate to the Doppelgänger what her new role is by secretly tapping her on the shoulder at night as soon as she gets her new role. The Doppelgänger appears as a Villager to the Seer until her target is eliminated, then is shown as her new role after that time. If the Doppelgänger becomes a Werewolf, she joins the werewolf team. Alternate: The Doppelgänger selects a player the first night and she instantly becomes that role (the original holder of that role is also that role). The Doppelgänger must be called every night when using this variant to allow her to do her special action if she has one (if she doesn't have a special role, she should still be called so that the other players don't know what role she has). While this can be a lot of fun, it can tilt the game viciously in one direction or another depending on the role obtained by the Doppelgänger.

Drunk: The Drunk thinks he is a regular Villager for the first two days, and does not know what he really is until the third night, when the Moderator wakes him and shows him his real role. The Drunk is seen by the Seer as his actual role (even if he doesn't know it yet). During deck preparation, mix a Werewolf, a Villager, and most or all of the other special roles together and pull one out without showing it to the players. That will be the Drunk's role.

Ghost: The Ghost is eliminated the first night. He writes down 10 letters at the end of the first night as a message from beyond, with the only limitation being that he may not attempt to identify any player by name or initials. Each morning, the Moderator reveals one letter (in order) from the Ghost. The clues given by the Ghost can be interpreted in many ways, and makes conversation during the first day much more animated than otherwise. Alternate: The first player to be eliminated becomes the Ghost, except that he retains his original team. If the game is not a role reveal game, the players will have to guess what team the Ghost is on.

Hoodlum: On the first night, the Hoodlum indicates two players. The only way the Hoodlum can win is if both of those players are eliminated by the end of the game and the Hoodlum is still in the game. Normal victory conditions for the other teams are still present, so the Hoodlum needs the Villager team to win in order for him to win as well. Alternate: The Hoodlum picks four players, and if the Hoodlum is still in the game when those players are eliminated, the game is over and the Hoodlum wins instantly, and all other teams (except possibly the Cult Leader) lose.

Hunter: If the Hunter is eliminated (during the day or night), he immediately fires his weapon by pointing at any player, who is then eliminated. He may also choose to fire his weapon straight up, resulting in no additional elimination. No one may speak while the Hunter chooses a target. If the Hunter is eliminated at night, he picks his target immediately the next morning.

Lone Wolf: The Lone Wolf only wins if he is the last player standing (or achieves parity with the village by having only one other non-Werewolf player left in the game). The Lone Wolf wakes with the Werewolves to choose a target each night. This role is best if added at random to the deck; players should not know for certain if this role is included.

Lycan: The Lycan has a dormant strain of werewolfism, and appears to be a Werewolf to the Seer even though she's not. This role should be added at random to the deck; players should not know for certain if this role is included. Alternate: In role reveal games, the Lycan is shown to the players to be a Werewolf when she is eliminated.

Mason: The first night the Moderator calls for the Masons to open their eyes and look for the other Mason(s). No one in the village may directly or indirectly speak of the Masons, or the players who speak of them are eliminated that night by the secret society in order to keep it a secret. If they are eliminated by the secret society, they automatically lose, even if they are on a winning team. The Moderator needs to use discretion here; it's much better for gameplay if the subject is never discussed directly or indirectly by the players. If a player says, "well, Bobby knew Joe was safe, but Bobby's not the Seer," that's a clear reference to the Masons, so that player should be eliminated. Players will only make this mistake once.

Mayor: The Mayor's vote counts twice when voting to eliminate a player; this is done by the moderator secretly counting the mayor's vote twice (he'll need to wake the Mayor up on the first night so he knows who it is). The Mayor can be a normal role card handed to a player, or the players can vote on a Mayor on the first day, with that Mayor being in place until he is eliminated, at which point another Mayor must be elected.

Minion: No card is required for the standard use of this role. The first night, the Werewolves pick a player, and that person becomes the Werewolves' Minion and moves to the Werewolf team. The Player learns who the Werewolves are, but does not wake with them at night. The Seer sees the Minion as a Villager. If the Minion has another special role, that role remains intact (so it is possible to have a Seer Minion, for instance, though that would be very bad for the village team). If playing with both Vampires and Werewolves, each team may have a Minion. Alternate: Deal this card as a regular role, and show the Minion who the Werewolves are, and also show the Werewolves who the Minion is. The card prevents the Minion from having a dual role.

Moderator: The Moderator card is used when randomly selecting a Moderator for a game. For experienced groups, add the Moderator card into a deck that already consists of one card for each player besides yourself, deal the cards, and have everyone go to sleep. The player with the Moderator card then starts moderating that first night.

Old Hag: Each night, the Old Hag places a pox on a player; that player must leave the game area for one day, and may not take place in discussions, elimination, or any other activities that happen during the day (that player is also safe from the Hunter or any other method of elimination from another player). The Old Hag may not place a pox on herself or the same player twice in one game. Alternate: After the initial target returns, that night the target chooses the next player to place a pox on, and so on. If a player who had the pox placed on them is eliminated at night, the Old Hag places a pox on another player the following night.

Paranormal Investigator: One night during the game, the Paranormal Investigator indicates one player, and is told if at least one of the players to the target's immediate left or right, or the target himself, is a Werewolf. The Moderator does not say which of those players is a Werewolf, just that at least one of them is.

Pacifist: The Pacifist always votes for players to stay in the game. The Pacifist is a nice boost for the Werewolf team, as it's one extra vote to prevent players from being eliminated during the day. This role should be added at random to the deck; players should not know for certain if this role is included.

Priest: One night during the game, the Priest may choose any player to be protected by holy power. The next attempt to eliminate that player by any means fails. The Priest may not choose himself. If the Priest is eliminated after "blessing" someone in this way, that player is still protected. Alternate: Once per game, the Priest may learn the role of an eliminated player. This version of the role is only used in the "No Reveal" variant.

Prince: If the Prince is voted on to be eliminated during the day, he is revealed as the Prince, and is not eliminated. The Village falls asleep immediately after this failed elimination, as if it was successful.

Sorceress: The Sorceress looks for the Seer each night (the Moderator shows a "thumbs up" if the Sorceress points to the Seer). The Werewolves do not know who the Sorceress is, and the Sorceress does not know who the Werewolves are. The Seer sees the Sorceress as a Villager. Alternate: The Sorceress is shown who the Werewolves are on the first night. This is a significant advantage for the werewolf team.

Spellcaster: Each night, the Spellcaster may choose one player to be muted for the following day (that player may not speak but may communicate any other way). The Spellcaster may choose to mute themselves, but may not mute the same player twice during a single game. Alternate: Each night, the Spellcaster must choose a player to be muted for the following day.

Tanner: The Tanner only wins if he is eliminated. Victory conditions for the other teams are still present; the game continues after the Tanner wins. Alternate: Only the Tanner wins if he is eliminated; all the other teams lose if the Tanner wins. This causes a great deal of angst and stress among the players, and gives the Werewolves another angle to argue (until the Seer checks them, of course).

Tough Guy: If targeted by the Werewolves, the Tough Guy is eliminated the following night (instead of the same night he was targeted). The players are told that no one has been eliminated on the night he is targeted. The following night there may be two or more player eliminations: the Tough Guy as well as any other characters eliminated that night. The Moderator will need to wake up the Tough Guy on the first night so that if he is targeted by Werewolves, the situation can be handled properly.

Troublemaker: Once per game, the Troublemaker can call for two eliminations the following day. Until she does this, she is woken up by the Moderator each night.

Vampire: The Vampires are a third major team in addition to the Werewolf team and the Villager team. Vampires choose a target each night (in addition to the Werewolves' target), but that target is not revealed until an accusation occurs; the Vampire target is eliminated at that time. Vampires can't be eliminated by Werewolves, making them slightly more powerful than their furry counterparts. With three major teams, the Vampires or Werewolves need to totally eliminate the other two teams before declaring a victory. Vampires may be used in experienced large groups, substituting Vampires for Werewolves (the total number of Werewolves + Vampires should be the same as the number of Werewolves in a regular game). All special roles that target Werewolves (Seer, P.I., etc.) may also target Vampires (at the Moderator's discretion), but do not distinguish between the two teams.

Village Idiot: The Village Idiot always votes down. This role should be added at random to the deck; players should not know for certain if this role is included. Alternate: Do not deal this card, but instead randomly determine who the Village Idiot is. That player does not know he is a Village Idiot, and his vote is always recorded as a down vote.

Villager: Villagers' sole purpose is to find the Werewolves and eliminate them.

Werewolf: The Werewolves learn the identity of the other Werewolves the first night. Every night after the first night, the Werewolves must agree on a target to eliminate. If the Werewolves spend more than a minute determining a target for the night, they do not get to choose a target that night. The Werewolves may not target another Werewolf at night. Werewolves try to keep their identity a secret during the day.

Witch: The Witch may use her power to prevent someone from being eliminated once during the game to save someone targeted at night. She may also use her other power to eliminate a player once during the game to eliminate the player of her choice. The Moderator should call the Witch every night and ask if she would like to use either or both of her special powers, even if they have been used. Both powers may be used on the same night. Alternate: The Witch may only use one of her two powers during the game, but may choose which one to use.

Wolf Cub: The Wolf Cub is a Werewolf, and wakes with them each night. If the Wolf Cub is eliminated, the Werewolves get to eliminate two players the next night.

This game information is published by Bézier Games, Inc. and is written by Ted Alspach, with all rights reserved for the 2015 edition. No part of these rules or other game components may be duplicated or electronically copied, transmitted or posted without the express written consent of Ted Alspach and Bézier Games, Inc. Other related titles available include Werewolf Classic Movie Monsters, Werewolf Night Terrors, Werewolf Urban Legends, Werewolf Artifacts, One Night Ultimate Werewolf, One Night Ultimate Werewolf Daybreak, and Ultimate Werewolf Inquisition which includes the Full Moon expansion and is designed by Dan Hoffman. You can find more information at the official website.